Thomas Alva Edison's Evolution of Teamwork 1847-1880
-Kruthik Hulisandra

Thomas Edison was born in 1847, during the Manifest Destiny era, a period defined by rugged individualism, territorial expansion, and the pursuit of success. While the author does not claim that this ideology directly caused Edison's behavior, the environment in which he grew up is an important contextual backdrop.

As a child, Edison demonstrated a strong preference for learning through books. His father paid him for every book he completed and understood. After a brief period in school where Edison struggled, he was homeschooled by his mother, a high school teacher. Much of his education was self-directed. He consulted books, but preferred hands-on experimentation to fine-tune his knowledge. He built a laboratory in his family's cellar and invited friends such as James Clancy and Mike Oates to participate in experiments.

In one account, Clancy described an incident in which the boys filled a pine tree with powder and set it ablaze, damaging a neighbor's house. In another recollection, Edison persuaded Mike Oates to ingest excessive amounts of Seidlitz Powder, a laxative, and Mike fell ill.

Running experiments at home was Edison's passion, but he wanted to do more. After much deliberation at home, he convinced his parents to let him take a job as a newsboy at the Grand Trunk Railway. He decided to work because he wanted to "earn my own pocket money to buy chemicals and apparatus with which to experiment."

The train line he chose to work was from Port Huron to Detroit, a 60-mile journey that would take about 3 hours each way, with a few hours off at Detroit. This is where he learned that bigger cities have access to much better information. He spent his time at the public library reading books and buying chemicals he could not find in Port Huron. This naturally led him to expand his experiments. This is when Edison realized the information and access asymmetry between large cities and smaller towns.

The Civil War started in 1861 and transformed the nation. Brothers would be fighting brothers out on the battlefield based on which state they were living in, and the bloodshed was constant for about 4 years. Since information had to be shared with the generals in the front line to the respective commanding offices, communication networks were made a priority. During the war, over 15,000 miles of telegraph lines were installed (mostly for military use). Media outlets would also get access to these telegraphs and report on the news in a timely fashion, capturing the attention of citizens in the United and Confederate States. As a result, information became economically valuable.

It was just another day for Edison when he witnessed a mob surrounding the bulletin board near the newspaper offices. Upon inquiry, he found out that "around 60,000 were killed and wounded." Edison recalls thinking, "I knew if the same excitement was shown at the various small towns along the road, and especially at Port Huron, the sale of papers would be great." He thought of a 2-pronged strategy to sell as many papers as possible.

A 14-year-old Edison had already understood the discrepancy between current events and the information circulating in big cities like Detroit and in smaller towns. During the Civil War, this recollection reveals how a young Edison operated within the rapidly emerging information economy and how he positioned himself to capitalize on it.

Before becoming a professional inventor, Edison was not a strong teammate. Since he was a child, Edison has operated as the central decision-maker, making choices and persuading his friends to engage in risky experiments with him. He was also homeschooled, which helped develop a young Edison to take control of decisions and rely on others only for support. This shows that Edison saw collaboration as a means to achieve his goal, rather than as a shared responsibility to achieve a shared goal.

Edison arrived in New York in 1868, penniless, still thinking about getting a job as a telegraph operator. However, he could not find a job and wound up sleeping in the Gold Indicator Company's battery room. One night, a hundred people flocked to the company, demanding that the panicked operator fix the machine because they could not get updated gold prices. Edison diagnosed the problem, told the company's owner, Dr. SS Laws, "I can fix this," and fixed it in under 2 hours. Dr. Laws was impressed with Edison's composure under the immense pressure of being watched by the boss and a hundred people and offered Edison a job as an electrical engineer consultant for $300 per month. This shows that Edison was able to pivot his career into electrical engineering, not because of his education or teamwork skills, but because of his individual technical competence and problem-diagnostic and problem-solving skills.

Edison was about to hear the best news of his life when a meeting was set up with Gen. Lefferts, the owner of the Gold and Stock Telegraph Company. Edison pitched his idea for a remotely resettable ticker, unveiling an invention that would make tickers accessible to all cities, not just New York and London. Edison was expecting to receive around $5,000 for his work, but Gen. Lefferts offered him $40,000 (~$1M today). This shows that Edison had severely underestimated the economic value of his invention, and with the money, he was forced to be someone who could scale and organize innovations into commercially viable products, not just an individual tinkerer.

Using the money from Gen. Lefferts, Edison opened a manufacturing workshop in Newark, New Jersey, employing 50 men to start production of his invention. Gen. Lefferts also placed a large order for the updated tickers, and as demand increased, Edison scaled up to 150 people by the end of 1870. He also introduced a night shift to increase the workshop's productivity and supervised both shifts, sleeping for only a few hours a day in 30-minute intervals. Edison's intense work ethic established a cultural model in the workshop: "I gave them a good training as to working hours and hustling… and I allowed them to make good wages."

Although he was motivating his employees through his presence and work ethic, a then-22-year-old Edison had no idea how to run a business. For his workshop in Newark, Edison decided not to get a bookkeeper and instead relied on 2 hooks, one for accounts payable and one for accounts receivable. This was clearly a very disorganized method, and looking back, Edison regretted his decision and learned from the mistake.

Edison's creation and move into the Menlo Park Lab in 1876 was the inflection point for Edison to fully lean into taking a systemic and people-centric approach to inventing. Before, Edison only collaborated transactionally, focused on achieving his goals. However, in Menlo Park, Edison transformed his collaboration model to compete in the rapidly growing technology industry.

His new workshop, the Invention Factory, and the surrounding campus itself showed Edison's shift towards collaboration-based inventing. Edison did not just build a factory; he built a community. Having employees live together and working approximately 10 hours a day created a collaborative environment that helped people maintain their productivity. This decision to create a collaborative environment demonstrated Edison's new approach to capitalizing on innovation: individual brilliance was not enough to compete; it was a collective culture that sparked profitability.

Although Edison had all the credit allocation and decision-making authority, the lab culture was one of collaboration and "fun." Edison would sometimes take the employees fishing in the nearby Raritan Bay, tell jokes, create competitions, and, overall, invest his time in the emotional well-being of his employees. Charles Clarke, one of the engineers who worked with Edison, recalls "Laboratory life with Edison was a strenuous but joyous life for all, physically, mentally and emotionally." There was duality in Edison: a collaborative, fun person to his teammates, but ruthless in his business execution. He demonstrated integrating the charming, social, and fun newsboy energy, with the hierarchical systems thinking he had picked up from working as a telegrapher, and the drive and curiosity he seemed to innately have.

Failure was viewed as part of the development process in this lab. Edison would carry notebooks with him, noting his failures and tracking them to ensure time and resources were not wasted repeating the same mistakes. Edison is famously quoted as saying, "If I find 10,000 ways something won't work, I haven't failed. I am not discouraged, because every wrong attempt discarded is just one more step forward."

---REFLECTIONS---

Living in Silicon Valley, I see many companies and leaders use the Edisonian method of teamwork to create game-changing products and innovations for the world. I had the chance to meet and ask a few questions to Courtney Hohne, Cultural Architect for Google X – Moonshot Factory. She was responsible for shaping the team's culture that built the world's first self-driving cars. She said one thing that really stood out to me, "When you're working towards building a self-driving car, you don't get instructions; you only have people to rely on." This mirrors Edison's learning, especially at the Menlo Park Lab.

Seeing that I have, at some level, learned what Edison learned gave me a lot of confidence to trust my instincts and execute, instead of being frozen in the "am I thinking about this in the right way?" loop.

We have been "not in a downturn" since COVID. The economic and political climate of the USA is almost as tumultuous as it was during the Long Depression, with giant corporations like Google and Meta, and, more recently, OpenAI and Palantir, controlling a large share of the tech market and, consequently, a large share of the economy. Learning about how Edison positioned himself and looking at the skills he developed, there is a huge potential for someone like Edison to become very successful in this era as well.

So why can't it be me?
